hello I'm Jason Gatson you're listening
to think again a big think podcast since
2008 big think has been bringing you big
ideas in small concentrated doses from
some of the most creative thinkers
around on the think again podcasts we
step outside of our comfort zone
surprising my guests and me your host
with ideas from these archives that we
didn't necessarily come here prepared to
discuss today I'm very very happy to be
here with Ian McEwan he's the
best-selling author of 16 books
including atonement which won the
National Book Critics Circle Award in
the WH Smith literary award and
Amsterdam which won the Booker Prize his
latest book nutshell is a darkly
hilarious
brilliant riff on Shakespeare's Hamlet
told from the point of view of an
extremely articulate nine month old
fetus viewing the unfolding plot through
a glass darkly from the vantage point of
its mother's womb
welcome to think again Thank You Daisy I
wonder you know just for the readers and
I guess spoiler alert we're probably
going to get into territory here that's
going to give some things away I mean I
want to kind of dance around it but it
hardly matters everybody knows Hamlet
yeah yeah but your yeah but your book
does veer in directions I mean is there
anything else you would say in
introducing the book aside from you know
my kind of like publicity blurb that I
just gave well it's essential spirit is
playful
once you've set yourself the task of a
narrator in such an enclosed space can't
see a thing but come over here and
learns about the world largely through
his mother's sessions with the radio and
with podcasters like your own right and
also has a fairly privileged access to
all her private conversations and
intimate life with the man he discovers
to be his uncle right with whom his
mother is having an affair so he's
uniquely placed to witness their
lovemaking yeah yeah it's spirit as
playful as I said but it also
allows me to let my narrator speculate
about the world is about to join in a
sense it picks up from the quote in
Hamlet I could be bounded in a nutshell
and count myself a king of infinite
space were it not that I have bad dreams
the bad dreams are essentially the news
of the world he's about to join right
yet at the same time he's intellectually
very lively is full of curiosity and
even though he contemplates suicide by
strangling himself with the umbilical
cord he also is consumed by the wish to
know how it's gonna turn out the 21st
century yeah one thing that struck me is
you know as you say he's full of
curiosity and enthusiasm and youth he's
nine months old but in a way because of
the circumstances and because of his
sort of I don't know pressed Ian's he is
denied innocence in a way he's denied
childhood in a way like I you know he
has to absorb all of this horror right
away you know yeah he he knows an awful
lot I mean he you know he knows the news
he knows the international situation he
knows the problems that we all talk
about when we talk about the state of
the world yeah terrorism yeah nuclear
arms race the whole lot at the same time
he has a streak of optimism about the
world he says he could recast all these
thoughts into a another construct which
is never have so many people come out of
poverty there are more literate people
than everywhere before the conditions of
modernity include anesthetics and
reading lights and oranges in winter so
we know he's not just a gloom merchant
no that's true and the other side of him
well there are two other things to say
about him is is that he's listened to a
15-hour podcast called know your whining
and his mother's quite a drinker against
all medical advice so he's quite an
expert on when she takes a drink he as
he says himself he can't say no he
thinks that most of us would have
forgotten what a good Sancerre tastes
like when it's decanted through a
healthy percenter
and he can he can spot was wind down to
the last terroir yeah exactly
he's actually better informed than his
mother is she's forgotten some of her
fine vintages that she just likes to
glug as long as it's white and cold and
knock it back but his uncle who in other
respects is a man of enormous banality
and sexual potency a terrible
combination fatal he seems to have
access to some very expensive wines miss
fauna you you start off with the
narrator with a very restricted
viewpoint yes yes slowly other
opportunities present themselves so for
example if you take the view as I do
that an emotional state is also a
physical state he has a direct line to
the pulse rate of his mother's heart
which is loud and squelching but also to
what he calls the launderette din of her
viscera so he knows a great deal about
the extent of what she's dissembling
when her voice is cool and straight and
yet her whole body is deafening him with
its turmoil he gets started with you
know hormones and other yes when she
feels an upsurge of joy he has to resist
feeling it too because she is involved
in a dastardly plot to kill his father
and he doesn't have a great deal of
agency and like most other fetuses as as
he points out my fetus not many of you
will know what it's like to have your
father's rivals penis inches from your
first and it does worry that at some
point Claude's gonna burst through and
penetrate his soft skull and filled his
brain with the teeming banality that his
claw so it's not only paranoia I mean I
think I would fear such a yeah it's
terrifying truly so I want to touch a
little bit on the relationship you know
the kind of playful relationship that
you have
if Shakespeare's Hamlet and one example
I wanted to give was for listeners who
may not know this speech fairly famous
speech from Hamlet often called the what
a piece of work is man speech
it's Hamlet explaining his I don't know
existential despair and depression in a
sense - Rosencrantz and Guildenstern who
have been sent to help him and he says
in the beginning I have of late though
wherefore I know not lost all my mirth
forgone all custom of exercise and
indeed it goes so heavily with my
disposition that this goodly frame the
earth seems to me a sterile promontory
and he talks about how wonderful
Humanity is how amazing we are and at
the same time how meaningless at all is
to him and this is recast in a very
different way here yeah I mean it is a
remarkably modern speech written right
at the beginning of the 17th century
it's a description of what a
psychiatrist would now call anhedonia
unable to take pleasure
Quint and depression a little depression
because he's not giving a cause he's not
saying I'm depressed because my father
has died and I suspect he'd been
murdered he's actually going deeper than
that and saying I'm depressed and that's
just one of the most I think one of the
many remarkable points about Hamlet as a
as a work of art it bursts onto the
scene with a specificity Hamlet doesn't
wreck he doesn't represent a virtue or a
vice like so many characters do right up
to the end of the sixteenth century
he is only himself and no one else
modern man he is he is the beginning of
I think modern selfhood so yeah I'll
pick it up here but lately don't ask why
I've no taste for comedy no inclination
to exercise even if I had the space to
delight in fire or earth in words that
once revealed a golden world of
majestical stars the beauty of poetic
apprehension the infinite joy of reason
these admirable radio talks and
bulletins the excellent podcast that
moves
seem at best hot air at worse a vaporous
stench the brave polity I'm soon to join
the noble congregation of humanity its
customs gods and angels it's fiery ideas
and brilliant ferment no longer thrill
me a weight bears down heavily on the
canopy that wraps my little frame
there's hardly enough of me to form one
small animal still less to express a man
my disposition is too stillborn
sterility then to dust this is the only
time it's interesting no one else has
asked me to read that it's the only time
when I really narrowed in on a famous
piece of Shakespearean prose because
actually it's what a piece of work is a
man it's not it's not it doesn't
necessarily scan in iambic s' and I
tried to fit every single word of that
speech and turn it around into that
prose passage before me and I just put a
pencil mark through each each
significant word yeah I was wondering
about you know that about sort of your
relationship to Hamlet as you wrote this
and were there times when you felt
hemmed in by the narrative or you know
and and like oh I'm supposed to do this
now and wait a minute I refuse to do
that or how did you relate to Hamlet as
you wrote this I've always been close to
that play anyway and I recently reread
it and it it was there from the start I
don't think I even took a conscious
decision to tell the plot of Hamlet
through the mouths of a fetus it was
just on my mind and before I even knew
it it had penetrated the whole
enterprise Oh for real so you started
writing this book and then how far in
were you when you realized Hamlet was
there a couple of months Wow
I had the first line so here I am upside
down and a woman and thought hmm I could
do something with that interesting I
wanted to talk to you about artifice a
little bit and the this idea that like
all good stories have already been
written
like from the standpoint of a novelist
in terms of plotting like when you're
coming up with a plot does that ring
true to you do you believe that that
basically all the good plots have been
written and everything is a variation on
them no I don't I mean it's well like
you'd think there'd be no room left for
any more tunes you know 12 notes right
on a romantic scale and yet amazingly I
know there a book saying there are
basically only seven plots or someone's
even proposes their only two plots but
this is a kind of conceptual reasoning
that doesn't really help us with
individual plots mine emerge rather than
are mapped out and they tend to emerge
through the exercise of character and
situation once the scene is set up a
plot follows here I have no problem with
a plot because you know there was Hamlet
but of course with the fetus somewhat
different the amount of agency he has is
down to two or three things one is he
can kick his mother awaking middle of
the night so that she turns on the radio
he can attempt to strangle himself with
the umbilical cord as I said and he can
get born he does which he has to do at
the end to at least make a gesture
towards revenge right okay so I mean I
guess so a thing I want to ask about I
one of my great pleasures when I was 23
or something was reading Nabokov I read
straight through most of his books and I
have to say that reading this book
sparked a similar pleasure that same the
same playful humor the same kind of
ability to tell a gripping tale and at
the same time let the seams show I mean
yes yeah yeah I don't know like well I'm
flattered by that
of course it's true that never cough is
the supreme master of the verbal surface
as well as the moral implications and
the curiousness of the story he's
telling there what I mean he is the
ultimate stylist I mean but I would also
name Updike John Updike in well too and
Saul Bellow to that extent in many ways
that kind of novel writing has faded
from us what we tend to get is a highly
subjective
out pouring onto the page with little
attention to the delight in the
sentences because I feel like there's a
drive toward authenticity there's this
hunger for immediacy and authenticity or
whatever as a fashion or something or
just a movement or whatever it is that
that has happened I think the other but
that rejected I mean Nabokov himself was
always getting critiqued for being too
artificial somehow yeah I'd like to
misses the point like I stole reviews of
uprights work saying it was too good the
prose is too good press can never be too
good Wow
so uh yeah so I think let's get to the
second part of our show where we have
these totally unexpected thoughts
starters I have not seen them I don't
know what they are okay and we just take
them as we find them okay you go where
we go this is Charles Duhigg who is a
journalist and it's something about
keeping your mind focused
nowadays it's incredibly hard to stay
focused there's so many distractions
that around us at any given moment your
pocket vibrates at any given moment
because we care getting 10 new emails
and on social media there's all these
new notifications and the phone is
ringing and your kids need help and your
colleagues are coming up because you are
working in an Open Office plan and
they're asking you to chime in on some
memo maintaining focus nowadays is
harder than ever before but in some ways
it's way more critical to one of the
things that we know about the most
productive people and the most
productive companies is that they create
ways to enhance their focus and the way
that they do this is by what's known as
building mental models you're I'm
sitting there and you're you're juggling
the kids and dinner and suddenly your
phone vibrates and it's this email
that's that causes the spike of panic
our instinct at a moment like that is to
react immediately to type something that
we end up regretting later on why are
some people so much better at
maintaining their focus and not reacting
and not getting distracted by all these
things it's because ahead of time
they've envisioned what they expect to
occur so on the subway when they're
writing to work they think about what is
this day gonna be like I know that I'm
going to this meeting what do I expect
to occur at that meeting and so when
they walk in and their boss asked some
some unexpected question they their
brain almost subconsciously says I
didn't expect that question to occur
this isn't matching the picture in my
brain of what I anticipated so I need to
put that question off I need to say can
we take that offline and I'll answer
that later
I think there's some useful truth in
that I to get some between 60 70 emails
a day and because I work in so many
fears you know I'm just we're just
making two movies at the moment I've
written the screenplay is from based on
previous novels I'm here on book tour
twelve other countries are waiting for
me to come there and their arrangements
so you know it's a tidal wave of stuff
that's requests where you have to me
Anna's request is you know will you
coming up to lecture will you speak for
this charity will you help raise funds
so it is then and I think the case for a
lot of writers a lot of responsibilities
flow out of publishing a book so even
though I'm not a business person I sense
the importance of managing this the best
way I think and I it's true to think
ahead is useful no doubt about that me
and I couldn't agree more but also to
compartmentalize to not just write
emails all day intermittently
but to say between 2:00 and 3:00 o'clock
I'm gonna sit down alright emails
between 7 and 8 o'clock I'm gonna commit
wholeheartedly to cooking dinner right
and drinking red wine are you consistent
about that are you good at actually
keeping those boundaries secure or more
or less obviously there are ongoing
urgent situations but on the whole most
of the emails you write are relatively
unimportant but still they must be done
their part of the business of being
alive right it is a blessing because we
now spend far less time on the phone I
think so
nor do we have so much time opening
letters which it also were
responsibility you know replying to a
letter in longhand like most of us used
to do was I think quite a burden
you know forgotten what a burden it well
then in finding a stamp in an envelope
and a post box it was quite a deal yeah
so there's some convenience here but if
you could just say for the next 15
minutes I'm gonna pay bills right and
when I get to the end of a few minutes
I'll stop and if there's some more bills
paid I'll do that in the next session
and it's this hiving off I think
the other thing is I keep a journal
that's a good way of bringing the
immediate past into focus it's perfectly
possible to live a busy life and forget
you exist right you just need one thing
after another and there's no moment for
the core of your selfhood
to be examined but sit down and just
write three sentences about a
conversation you had yesterday that
enables the kind of focus it's really
important yeah I mean I find that as far
as journaling goes the way it works for
me is more like the various things that
are happening around me and in my life
they build up and they sort of rattle
about it and like if I sit down to do
something creative write write a short
story or something
some days I need to journal first
they're like yeah half an hour just to
kind of clear the submitting the air and
clear the decks yeah
that's useful but he's right about
thinking ahead into situations there's a
lot of the time you can just drift into
them
yeah and improvise you can't ever quite
know what's gonna happen or what's gonna
be asked for what's gonna be presented
to you right but but just imagining it
ahead of time is a very useful exercise
it's a bit about to get a bit
philosophical about it I mean it's it's
sort of about power and agency it's
about the world demanding things of you
and you can either be sort of the
passive servant to all of these demands
or take control of your own time and do
with it what you want
absolutely the other important element I
think and this is to close down
literally physically throw the switches
on your computer right lots of people I
know have a program that closes down you
set set it for how long you want it off
you contact once you put it on once you
click this for three hours you can't you
can't use it nice it just disables all
communication functions on your computer
absolutely yeah so you Peter becomes
like a 1991 computer it's a standalone
device right with no inputs and I that's
the hard thing I think for us writers is
the machine that we're writing on which
used to be a typewriter the machine
we're writing on is now the source of
everything from pornography to your
closest friends illness yeah
it's tendrils reach and every reader
outward in English yeah so turning it
off turning off the phone not even going
near the newspaper I mean that's a great
thing about I mean I I hike a lot and
that is it I never take a phone with me
just to be in the moment and enjoying
the rock that we happen to inhabit and
its beauty yeah and also the pleasures
of getting lost sometimes you walk in a
deep wood there's dint a long did it's
quite possible to lose your way they've
got a problem to solve Alicia's to solve
a problem and yeah and come out I want
to ask you know just about writing I
mean with all of these you know as you
schedule these things and obviously some
things are unpredictable how do you
ensure that you as a novelist feel that
you're like on track and in with the
book you know that you're not getting
you know swept away and how do you carve
out that time and I think the crucial
word to deploy in most instances is the
word note I mean I mostly say no with
apologies and I say yes to one percent
and that still seems a fast amount but
you cannot say yes to everything
sure sure I mean there is a literary
festival around the world at any day of
the year and they have their lists of
writers and you know you'll be on them
and they'll be asking you
you've got to transcend the guilt so for
a long time I was so flattered to be
asked to kill and do something and in
pain about saying no right you've got to
get beyond that point right because any
arts administrator new novelists you
know let's have him in or her in and if
that person doesn't come we'll ask
someone else
sure it's no great pain for them I had
it used to have this formula the only
reason you're asking me is because I've
said no in the past to people like you
in other words I've got on with writing
right right so all these people want to
stop your writing they don't really want
to stop me writing but no that's the
total effect yeah if you went to it if
you went to everyone yeah
we're never right I could be at a
literary festival around the world every
day in that formulation of philip larkin
of pretending to be myself yes yes so
you've got to be a bit tough minded
about it I guess last question about
this in terms of focus and productivity
when you write like I'm sure you've been
asked this 80 billion times but like is
there a certain time of day are you you
have to be in a particular room have you
got to the point where you can actually
write on an airplane because you travel
so much I try not to travel so much I
live in the country my study is a huge
converted barn okay and it's got lots of
bookshelves two desks one for longhand
one is an enormous old kitchen table
about 10 feet 12 feet long and holds a
big screen so and two chairs between
alternately those two spaces gotcha so
I'm very lucky
sometimes longhand sometimes on the
computer
I think they fit very well together
actually I'm generally in or and feel
grateful for the machines we now live
with I think typewriters were terrible
machine longhand and computers with with
a kind of simulacrum of human memory
sent more accurate I think is a delight
I love the idea when I've started
something written maybe 5000 words
haven't printed any of it out but it's
held in secret in a memory there's not
my memory I like all that so I try to
work in the mornings but if things are
going I just I never let go because
other days it won't be going so well so
I tend to try and ride that wave knowing
for well with it's Monday now by Friday
I might have run out of the sort of
creative possibilities of the scene so
best to work on into the night if
disaster and if you sit down and it's
not going well like your head's not in
the right space like what do you do do
you just get up and go do something else
eventually but I think your duty is to
turn up
you try yeah got a turn oh it's no good
saying I don't feel like it over
breakfast you know gotta go and be there
at least
before you allow yourself to go and do
something else I don't believe in
writer's block I think it's just
nonsense that's been foisted on writers
I think hesitation is of crucial element
in in creativity but you do have to turn
up Kate tempest you know her as a poet
and she came here and she said that
writer's block is just the fear of
writing badly yeah and that's a youthful
fear you should welcome it yeah that was
lovely let's let's see where the next
what unexpected direction the next one
takes us in okay this is Glenn Cohen who
is a bioethicists and it is called
abortion in personhood what the moral
dilemma is really about and we can go
any way with this it needn't be tedious
so let's see
in the 1970s we had the roe v wade
decision in the United States it was a
decision rating relating to a woman's
right to have an abortion it introduced
the trimester framework it basically
allowed first trimester abortions made
it very difficult to have third
trimester abortions and essentially this
was really met very quickly thereafter
with the sort of backlash and really the
last 4050 years of American history have
more or less been a backlash against her
every wait an attempt to kind of
criminalize abortion and all sorts of
interesting ways without overturning the
decision facially so that's kind of a
legal playing field and we can talk
about some of the specifics but the more
interesting question I think is thinking
about the morality of abortion and I'll
say that I think abortion it's extremely
difficult question so one of the first
questions people have to think about is
are fetuses persons and that's a very
important linguistic question persons I
didn't say human beings I didn't say
alive those are three different issues
right something can be alive but not be
a person your dog is a good example you
love your dog it's a wonderful thing but
it's not a person something can be human
and potentially not be a person right
some people think the early embryo for
example before 14 days or stem cells
being derived are members of the human
species but may not be person so what do
we mean by persons we mean something
that has a certain set of moral and/or
legal rights the most important of which
is a right against in viability they
can't be killed or destroyed or harmed
without very good reason and we have the
attitude that we are all persons right
so we have an index case we're pretty
clear we're persons and the question is
who else is a person
I will say that although I am fiercely
protective of roe v wade and the you
know our right to have abortions I do
find it morally problematic if you come
down to you know if you come down to the
I I don't think it's easily solved do we
consider the potentiality of something
like of a fetus or an embryo to be more
important than that of just some sperm
or egg you know it's not easy I don't
think no it isn't easy and I think
that's the core of what he's saying well
I mean yeah we're discussing this in the
context of a novel in which a fetus is
talking so that where you haven't chosen
this out of nowhere well I'm okay I
don't think that I don't even think that
my producers are chosen knew that okay
all right well that's all the more
charming let me say from the beginning
that my novel is not a serious
contribution highly sensitive and
morally complex debate and Friends you
know you're in Europe when I said well
I've just been speaking to first two or
three American journalists to talk to me
down the line or down the phone about
nutshell and their first questions are
is this a pro-life novel and it had
never crossed my mind for a moment is my
country notable lack of irony and
awareness and I throw some eyes I said
you just have to unwrap for me that
question so can understand it he said
well you have a fully conscious fetus
and it would be very difficult to kill
this person because he seemed so real
and so he clip and I said listen this
person is talking breaks all the rules
of physics and biology and does not
exist and cannot usefully contribute to
this debate
we didn't hear the whole of into of his
talk I'm aware that this is sensitive in
the United States in ways that it is not
they're remotely to the same degree in
Britain or or Europe for that matter
even in Catholic countries because you
have less sort of fundamentalist
religion I mean he's setting up I think
very beautifully and astutely the moral
ethical dilemmas here but his not yet
mentioned religion and the I guess where
I would part company with with a lot of
one side of the American debate is the
notion of the soul and that even the
blastocyte you know six days has a soul
I don't think we have any evidence for
this I don't think a soul is a useful
concept Brett but it informs a great
deal of American passion at least on one
side of this I mean if you look if you
believe that God makes every embryo and
that intends that to become a human
being and has a plan for it then the
arguments over like you can't possibly
if you can't possibly support but God
also makes every pigeon an earthworm we
have to take that into account so it's
very hard to are actually enter into any
kind of useful exchange with what I
think is the core of the so-called
pro-life faction in the United States
the other thing to say is
to paraphrase Shakespeare opinions do
not come as single spies so if you are
pro-life you're probably to the right of
the spectrum if you're pro-choice you of
your to the center to the liberal end of
the spec and with it comes a whole set
of other attitudes about the economy
about nuclear weapons about fouls and
other things right are all glommed onto
this little yeah but you're bringing
fetus right and if we don't but if we
don't allow it which is difficult to
smuggle in all of that politics and kind
of you know identity and so on like I
think it's very hard to be comfortable
with abortion on any level even if you
support people's right to do it you know
it's very hard
absolutely because yeah we should be
first of all in no doubt everyone I know
everyone I know who's had an abortion
has had to go through a terrible ordeal
it's like terrible yeah yeah the use of
abortion as a as a means of
contraception
I think is deeply problematic and yeah
to some extent abhorrent I would say
that clearly somewhere along the line in
those 40 weeks were looking at a
spectrum of possibility of individuation
selfhood sure and actually birth is not
a breaking off point we know that white
matter in the brain goes through
extraordinary amount of connectivity in
the first years of life right and out of
that emerges personhood the
neuroscientist who was saying something
like 6 million neuron connections per
second that's between birth and age 6
it's impossible to lay down memory I
mean it's how would all dolly claim to
remember being in the womb I think
because not have the biological
apparatus that degree of connectivity
especially in a hypothalamus to lay down
memories his ego may have exactly in the
world and projected I think those dodgy
recovered memory on the social side we
know that when jurisdictions forbid
abortion absolutely vast amount to human
misery follows yeah so we've got to find
a middle way and I think the earlier we
push this especially now we have more
medical means sophisticated means of
making life viable at say 32 weeks and
so on that has to be taken into account
I would say that you've got to look at
the point at which the neural groove
folds in upon itself and becomes the
spine and the beginnings of some
rudimentary central nervous system is
where you want to be thinking roughly
the cutoff point the trouble is biology
runs on a spectrum the law has to be
sort of discrete and digital right yes
so know this point 12 weeks 18 weeks but
that is where it becomes a irresolvable
problem I mean the definition of
personhood is by nature I think and
an unsolvable philosophical problem
unresolvable but the law must resolve it
yeah what is the position so you're
never gonna get a perfect law you're
always gonna run roughshod over someone
or something but I would be cautiously
pro-life pushing it as early as possible
to and making it therefore available as
early as possible free in other ones
yeah I know runs against much American
policy in health free to everyone of
whatever means but really really early
before we have too much of the central
nervous system connecting itself up I
mean we have to we also have to accept
you know I mean the other side of this
is that adults have to make complex
moral choices like you know that it
might be better rather than raising a
child to adulthood if you're not able to
do it or sending them off into foster
care or whatever yeah even that's very
difficult because your baby in the book
has to think about that right like what
if you know he's he might be shipped off
to yeah it's either that'll go to prison
with his mother right he hasn't done
anything as he says so this I liberal
policy of allowing imprisoned mothers to
take their babies to jail in his view is
well babies haven't been arrested
they've not done anything what are they
doing in jail but they want to be with
their mothers I guess that's that's the
that's the payoff they must this is he
does he it doesn't he ultimately
resolved that he'd prefer
I mean settle on the idea of foster care
that he'd rather be free ya mean he ends
up in he's going to do his thing that's
the price he must pay for stopping them
fleeing to Paris this is what you the
cruel novelists have done to him yeah I
don't know whether your speaker there
gets to the business of the soul because
yeah we should say this is a seven
minute video yeah we will didn't have
time to I mean in many of the debates
about taking stem cells from embryos for
example a great deal of objection has
been about the fact that as soon as
and ovum is fertilized it becomes sacred
now that's a faith and it's very
difficult to arguing on the same terms
once you're in the supernatural but
interestingly this speaker the ground
for raising this as a difficult moral
problem and let's stop pretending that
it isn't because on the liberal side of
the equation I think they can be accused
of that right just thinking oh well this
is crap it's all feminism and it's dead
right and it's a woman's right to ironic
rest of you could go and take a running
leap ironically I would say given that
lib the liberal you know the left is
often accused of caring too much being
too emotional being too empathetic you
know with suffering and yet you're not
able to empathize with well they're
running into a real dilemma on the one
hand there are the demands of women who
say we want control of their own bodies
right I don't want patriarchal
structures to be telling them what to do
on the other hand there are awkward
questions to ask an answer about
personhood yeah but yeah I think he sets
out the the core of the problem without
religion right extremely well I I think
we'll leave it there Ian McEwan I have
really enjoyed talking with you today
and highly recommend your book nutshell
and I highly recommend it to my audience
it's about 200 pages long and incredibly
gripping and you will not probably stop
reading it from the moment you open it
until you are done thanks so much for
being on think again today thanks for
having me
and that's it for this week's episode of
think again with author Ian McEwan the
fall is publishing season so after a
summer in which we did a number of
mixtapes looking back on the past year
we have a lot of exciting new
conversations coming up for you please
take a minute if you haven't done so
already to rate or review the show and
iTunes or stitcher or odd catcher or any
one of the million other places that you
may be listening to this show and please
join us next week when my guest is Alton
Brown who has a lot to say about a lot
more than just food see you then